[[!meta title="A new game for web ads"]]
[[!meta date="Thu Apr 23 17:49:08 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Darren Herman writes that
[we need to change the online advertising
game](https://medium.com/@dherman76/don-t-skate-to-where-the-puck-is-going-change-the-game-c98de95f0f4e)
in order to do something about ad blocking.  (Read the
whole thing.)

Good points.  But in a couple of ways, he's
giving advertising credit for too little power
and usefulness.  And advertising is not just more
important than we often think it is, but in more
danger than it looks like.

> The most widely used content monetization model is coming under threat.

Unfortunately, it's already been under threat
for a while.  Ad blocking is high profile,
but the two stealthier but bigger problems are [signal
loss](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#how-signaling-breaks-down)
and data leakage.  Data leakage artificially shifts
ad spending away from high-value ad-supported sites,
and toward intermediaries and lower-value sites. Many
of the low-value sites that benefit are
infringing, fraudulent, or outright
security threats.

> You’d think that people would like advertising because of how directly linked it is to content. I’d argue that some of the best advertisements are really good pieces of content.

Signal is more than just content.  Markets are
complicated.  It's hard for people to locate the
valuable goods and services while avoiding deception.
The first ads were signs to help people find their
trusted vendors, and in a way, ads still are.

When ads [build a consistent position](https://twitter.com/goodautomarket/status/450644690195345410), a statement of <q>this is
what we do well, this is what we can do for you,</q>
then they help people find their way around even in
more complicated markets.

If your ad isn't a landmark, but a flyer blowing
across someone's path, it's just an annoyance.
Advertising offers signal in exchange for attention.
Fail to signal, and people will hold back their
attention, using automated help where possible.


Ad blocking: it's not just about the annoyance
----------------------------------------------

Users say that they're blocking ads to minimize
annoyance, and that's certainly part of it.  But we
can't understand ad blocking behavior without
remembering that back in the days of "Internet
Junkbuster," "AdSubtract," "Webwasher," and other
proto-adblockers, ad blocking rates were tiny.  Those
early ad blockers were just as easy to use as the ad blockers of
today.  They were perfectly effective against late 1990s and
early 2000s web ads, which were even crappier and
more annoying than today's. <em>What changed?</em>
The annoyance level didn't.  Signaling value of web
ads, as seen by users, did.  The answer to "how did
ad blocking go mainstream?" is part of the answer to
how it will go away again, and a key step how we get
to play that new game.

