[[!meta title="Ad blockers: myths and facts"]]
[[!meta date="Sat Jul  4 05:59:24 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Visit any end-user message board where amateur
computer advice is dispensed and discussed,
and you will start to see that <q>just use an ad
blocker</q> has started to replace <q>just update your
antivirus</q> or <q>just turn on your firewall</q>
as the default advice for when someone's computer is
acting hinky.

 * Creepy ads following you around? Just use an ad
   blocker!

 * Internet slow? Just use an ad blocker!

 * New unwanted feature in an application? Just use
   an ad blocker!

Ad blockers are no more magic than antivirus
or firewalls.  But they do give users a sense of
agency, so simply [admonishing users to turn the
ad blocker off](/posts/turn-off-your-ad-blocker/)
is no solution.  The <q>turn off your ad blocker</q>
message is unlikely to get someone to abandon a tool
that he or she sees as essential protection, and just
reflects badly on the site that uses it.

At the same time, though, sites will benefit by
educating users about the limitations and non-magical
qualities of ad blockers.  For example, by default,
the most popular ad blocker, AdBlock Plus, will allow
many risky third-party trackers through.  The privacy
features are not enabled at install time.

In order to warn users about the
problem, the Aloodo [tracking protection
test](http://www.aloodo.org/test/) now includes a
simple ad blocker test (using a harmless transparent image 
called <q>ad.gif</q>).  

The test result page now includes an additional
message shown to ad blocker users who are still
vulnerable to third-party tracking.  All part of the
process of refining the message and helping to move
users from general ad blocking to tracking protection.

