[[!meta title="Beware of averages: why you need a local tracking protection metric"]]
[[!meta date="Thu Jun 28 06:38:02 PDT 2018"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

According to conventional adtech and martech, exactly
0% of users are blocking tracking by conventional
adtech and martech.

You can look at ad blocking rates by market to get an
idea of how many "invisible" users there are, but the
"headline rate" for ad blocking has two problems.

 * The ad blocking rate mixes up users of three kinds
 of software: tracking protection tools that block
 only third-party tracking (such as Privacy Badger),
 pure ad blockers that block both third-party trackers
 and ads (such as uBlock Origin) and ad blockers that
 run paid whitelisting schemes (such as Adblock Plus).

 * Ad blocking and tracking protection percentages
   are vastly different from site to site.  Some
   sites serve a community of practice whose members
   install a lot of privacy tools.  Some sites don't.

For example, several sites that cover web development
and devops are getting tracking protection rates
around 30%.  One site is around 40%.  But if you look
at the average tracking protection rate for a country,
you don't see how much of a brand's audience is less
trackable.  (You can't walk across a river that is
an average of two feet deep.) What does this mean for
brands?

 * If you're not reaching people, you're not reaching
   them.  Most of today's web advertising is invisible
   to users of some privacy tools and ad blockers.

 * Higher blocking rates don't necessarily mean you
   get billed less for ad impressions. They can mean
   that more of the impressions you do get billed for
   are bots.

 * Data-driven marketing decisions get you the wrong
   answers if real customers get consistently missed.

What can brands do?  The first step is to figure
out if a brand has the kind of protected customers
who make it necessary to do something.  If all the
customers are neatly trackable, that brand probably
has higher priorities. (protip: brand safety)

If you run the test and the customers are better
protected from tracking than the average, that's
where the opportunity comes in.

While the competition wastes their budget on reaching
the wrong people, or bots, they're not getting to the
tracking-protected audience.  Knowing if you have
tracking-protected customers is the first step in
building creative ways to reach them.

[Next steps: JavaScript
instructions](https://www.aloodo.org/sites/), or
contact us using the form below.

