[[!meta title="Bike helmets"]]
[[!meta date="Sat Feb 20 06:57:03 PST 2016"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

An adtech proponent once suggested this to me
(slightly paraphrased).

> You can keep track of households that have children
> and are interested in cycling.  Then when the parents
> visit a news site, you can offer them a 25% discount
> on children's bike helmets!

Cool story bro.

But that kind of thing is the
lowest-value part of advertising.
Adtech people are trying to chase [another $50
billion](http://adexchanger.com/data-driven-thinking/consumers-will-drive-the-next-50-billion-in-ad-tech/)
by rearranging database marketing and
throwing more computers at the problem.  But that's
not where the money is.

Let's think about that bike helmet example a little
more.

Very few parents, fortunately, have direct experience
of the quality of a children's bike helmet.  You buy
the thing, keep it for a while, the kid outgrows it
or loses it, and you're done with it.

Unless something really bad, that you don't want to
think about, happens.  Some event where the difference
between a good bike helmet and a not-so-good bike
helmet means the difference between <q>remember that
time I crashed my bike and we had to go buy a new
helmet?</q> and something else.

Bike helmets are really hard for shoppers to tell
apart.  It looks like they're all basically made out
of the same stuff.  Some hard plastic, some foam,
some nylon straps.  But some designs are better
than others.  Specific products change all the
time, but some companies are good at some product
categories. Some brands have a good reputation.

Reputation. Some company is known for doing well at
engineering, testing, and manufacturing?  And I can
pay that company to _feel better about the protection
of my child's brain_?  Like the man says, shut up
and take my money.

Where does that reputation come from?
It doesn't come from stalking users with the
digital version of windshield flyers.  Building [brand
equity](http://adcontrarian.blogspot.com/2009/01/other-thing-advertising-does.html)
is complicated, and depends only partly on
advertising.  And the advertising piece of the
puzzle depends on where the ad appears, and how
consistently and expensively it appears.

Product ads and product-related editorial need
each other.  High-reputation news and reviews come
from a high-reputation source, and a publication's
reputation depends on having the budget to write
independently.  The budget depends on ad sales.  And
[signaling](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#signaling)
connects it all up.  A brand's ability and willingness to
advertise in a high-reputation publication carries
a powerful signal of its intent in the
market.  A high-reputation publication isn't afraid
to write bad things about problem products&mdash;even
the ones that come from its advertisers.

Publisher reputation is even
more important in regulated product
categories.  Shoppers know about [regulatory
capture](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regulatory_capture)
even if they don't know to call it that.
Government standards need independent reviews just
as much as the products do.  Same problem, one level
up, even harder to do.  (Anyone got a good link to a
story about cadmium, a toxic metal, in art materials
sold for children's use?  And what regulations cover
it? Let me know, I'll be over here chewing crayons.)

In real life, customers aren't in a <q>funnel</q> or a
[distillery](https://blogs.harvard.edu/doc/2015/01/10/on-marketings-terminal-addiction-to-personal-data-fracking-and-bad-guesswork/),
working their way down the pipe to purchase.
Customers are active participants in markets and
in communities of practice.  Humans are wired to
constantly try to measure the reputation and honesty
of others.  Everyone is picking up on signals, all
the time.

So reputable publications run obviously expensive,
hard-to-repudiate ads, which pay for more and better
journalism and cultural works, which build publisher
reputation, and that reputation brings in more ad money,
and around and around the engine of wealth creation
goes.  Tracking and targeting users doesn't just
take a piece out of publishers' share&mdash;it breaks
the cycle.  (Am I always getting ads for crap because
someone thinks I don't know any better? Or am I seeing
that same thing that more knowledgable shoppers are?)
Signaling and the open web are a great match, as soon
as we web people can fix up all those 1990s bugs that
allow for cross-site tracking.

**Let's make web ads work.**  The first step in
growing web advertising from a targeted medium
to a signal-carrying medium is to get more users
protected from third-party tracking, so that
signal-carrying ads will stand out.  [Take a
tracking protection test and be part of the
transformation.](http://www.aloodo.org/test/)
Firefox users, try the new [pq
add-on](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-uS/firefox/addon/pq/)
to turn on Firefox's Tracking Protection
functionality.  The social silos can growth-hack their
funnels and distilleries of stalking, couponing,
and crap, while the open web makes mad cash with
signaling.

