[[!meta title="Bullshit is there for a reason"]]
[[!meta date="Wed Nov  2 05:59:24 PDT 2016"]]

As Professor Harry G. Frankfurt [once
wrote](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/On_Bullshit), 

> One of the most salient features of our culture is that there is so much bullshit. 

Bob Hoffman points out that this is especially true in
keynote speeches about online advertising.  But all
that bullshit is there for a reason.  What would
happen if you took the bogus scientification and
marketing-speak out of the Thought Leader Insights?
You'd get something more like these.

 * You don't need to make creative advertising because
   a machine, or some random person on Amazon
   Mechanical Turk, can generate a bunch of ads until
   something sticks.

 * Third-party tracking lets you reach high-value users
   for less money on low-value sites, because CTOs and
   minivan buyers regularly visit che3p-viagra.biz and
   watch the videos all the way through.

 * Fraud isn't a problem because code monkeys in an
   open-plan monkey house, reporting to douchebags
   and working for point squat percent of a company
   in four years, are smart enough to out-hack a
   fraud developer who is working on his own time,
   for 100% of the gain, in 30 days.

 * If you just _educate_ users about how web ads
   work, they'll be happy to let sites they've never
   heard of excrete untested combinations of code
   onto the computers and devices where they keep
   stuff they care about.

None of those will fly in their bare form, but load
them up with a bunch of "customer journey" and "deep
learning" and now you've got a keynote.

So there may be perfectly good reasons why you might
want to apply a substantial layer of bullshit to what
you're doing.  If so, carry on.

**But what if you have a real problem?**

 * The web is still a [terrible place to build
   brands](http://blog.aloodo.org/posts/tv-shopping-with-rory-sutherland/).

 * Web advertising is still low-value enough that it
   won't sustain high-reputation
   publications when print revenue goes away.

 * Third-party crap is still a security risk.

Then you need an alternative to bullshit, so
[go read more about getting Bob to speak at your
event](http://adcontrarian.blogspot.com/2016/11/its-your-lucky-day.html).

