[[!meta title="If I'm wrong about GDPR, I'll buy you a burrito"]]
[[!meta date="Thu May 25 07:38:02 PDT 2017"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Europe is [getting new privacy regulations that will
limit surveillance marketing](http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/europe-s-strict-privacy-rules-terrifying-apple/309155/).

I see their point.  Instead of making people navigate
the fine print of privacy policies and click through
broken opt-out systems.  the EU is trying to save
everyone some time and risk.

Meanwhile, California, like the rest of the USA,
has basically zero privacy.  But we do have [great
burritos](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mission_burrito)
here, so we've got that going for us anyway.

Some surveillance marketing proponents say that
if Europe rolls out GDPR, then there
goes all the creative stuff on the Internet.
(which is roughly what the DRM proponents
said about DRM, but [Hugo-award-winning
author Charles Stross already explained that
one](http://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2011/11/cutting-their-own-throats.html).)

Personally, I agree with [Doc
Searls](https://blogs.harvard.edu/doc/2017/01/26/how-true-advertising-can-save-journalism-from-drowning-in-a-sea-of-content/)
that the role of privacy violation in ad-supported
Internet services is way overrated.  Most of the value
is in ad context (what site the ad is on) and search
(which does have some customization based on who you
are, but mostly works based on what you search for.)
[Targeting just provokes blocking and makes ads less
valuable](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/).
So GDPR won't break the Internet, or even ad-supported
sites.  I'm confident enough in this that I will back
it up with an offer.

If the surveillance marketers are right, then
Europeans would be deprived of some neato Internet
services that we, here in California, are allowed
to have.  So, demonstrate for me an Internet service
that is...

 * mentioned in a news story as creative or innovative

 * not offered in Europe, and the company behind it has
   stated that they won't offer it in Europe because
   GDPR.

...and I'll buy you a California burrito and link
to the service from here and on Twitter. First five
demos get a burrito and link.

If I'm right, then Europeans will get better
advertising, a safer Internet, less fraud, stronger
brands, and I'll get to eat the burritos myself.
