[[!meta title="Haha n00b, learn to hack!"]]
[[!meta date="Wed Aug 17 05:49:08 PDT 2016"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

The web ad business is full of deception,
according to...you thought I was going to say
[Bob Hoffman](http://adcontrarian.blogspot.com/),
didn't you?

No, I'm going to cite no less
an authority than Interactive
Advertising Bureau CEO Randall Rothenberg, who
[advises](http://digiday.com/publishers/iab-chief-brands-cant-pass-buck-policing-media-issues/)
that any brand that has to deal with companies
in his industry had better hire someone with mad
hacking skills.

> The problem begins with the unwillingness of major marketers to insource significant, senior-level technical expertise. 

At _Marketing Week_, Thomas Hobbs
[quotes Alessandra Di Lorenzo, chief commercial
officer for advertising and partnerships at
Lastminute.com](https://www.marketingweek.com/2016/08/15/brands-without-a-chief-media-officer-are-sacrificing-power-to-agencies/).

> Anyone who is a non-digital, native brand is probably less skilled in the inner workings of media and should be more on guard about what is really going on.

This is like needing a Chief Power Supply Officer
because you buy PCs and you don't trust your vendor
not to put in a bad power supply.  In any other
business, if you have a problem with deceptive
sellers, a halfway decent trade organization would
be all over that.  "Tired of getting ripped off by
crooks who sell other people's condos on Craigslist?
Next time, call a Realtor&reg; from the National
Association of Realtors&reg;." You know the drill.
Every trade organization does this.

Except the adtech business.  From adtech, brands get
roughly the same message that a WordPress user with
a security problem would get on
a phpBB site tricked out with a black background
and rotating ASCII-art skulls. **haha pwned n00b!
Better learn 2 h@ck nxt t1m3!!!1!** The IAB puts
an ideological committment to unlimited third-party
tracking ahead of the interests of its honest members'
customers.

It's not an "advertising" thing&mdash;magazine ads
really get printed, bus ads really get stuck to
the bus, radio stations really transmit. Adfraud is
the unavoidable by-product of today's web ad system
that allows ads to be targeted across high and low
reputation sites.  You don't need a fraud expert to
buy magazine ads, but the web is another story.  And that
"senior-level technical expertise" that IAB wants you
to get is not cheap.  Software companies have enough
trouble hiring people with hacking skills&mdash;and
now any brand that wants to run a web ad is going to
need one?

[Judy Shapiro
writes,](http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/saas-business-model-bad-marketing/305416/)
"Marketers' trust in the ad-tech world is on the
decline for lots of reasons: complexity, lack of
transparency or standards."

I suppose that's a nice way of saying that people
who are responsible for brands are sick of being told
that deception is here to stay and it's up to you to
learn to deal or hire a hacker who can.

[Dr. Augustine Fou
writes](https://www.exchangewire.com/blog/2016/08/15/44779/),

> We are, after all, dealing with hackers who are very advanced in the use of technology AND who don’t play by the normal rules of engagement. The good guys are at a disadvantage before the race even starts. Something other than technology must be applied at the same time – like changing the financial motives or changing the metrics used to calculate ROI. For example, rather than use quantity metrics – such as number of impressions, traffic, and clicks – that are easily faked, if advertisers focused on actual sales or other ‘conversion events’ that only humans would do, they would be far better off, and less prone to fraud stealing their ad dollars.

But unless you have Dr. Fou or some other expert working for you,
attribution is no solution.  One
thing everybody can learn from the [Steelhouse/Criteo
controversy](http://www.businessinsider.com/steelhouse-files-counterclaims-against-criteo-2016-7)
is that attribution models are subject to gaming,
and it's hard to work backward to see where the
attribution snatching happened.  Fraud can piggyback
on a user's activity in order to let a 
fraudulent ad take credit for a real sale.  This is even worse than
straight-up bogus impressions, because it encourages
you to move marketing money to places where it doesn't
reach real users.  Most of the people who really
understand attribution models are fraud hackers.

Bob asks, [Will The P&G Story Bring Down Ad Tech?
Please?](http://adcontrarian.blogspot.com/2016/08/will-p-story-bring-down-ad-tech-please.html)

(P&G is an interesting example for all the behavioral
economists out there.  This company is mostly selling
products that you buy because Society expects you,
as a sanitary human being, to use them. If you don't
know that Society is seeing the same ad, why take
the risk of overspending on making life less stinky
for others when you don't have to?)

The answer to Bob's question is: no, this story won't
have much impact all by itself.  But it does make
people think:
how can we transform web advertising
from a hacking game that brands can't win into a
reputation game where brands have the advantage?
[Some
more on behavioral economics and possible next steps](http://blog.aloodo.org/posts/tv-shopping-with-rory-sutherland/).

