[[!meta title="Markets for intent data?"]]
[[!meta date="Sat Apr 16 08:27:20 PDT 2016"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

This is an extended version of a question that I want
to ask the participants at [VRM Day
2016](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/vrm-day-2016a-tickets-21117765806).

An idea that keeps coming up is the suggestion that
prospective buyers should be able to sell purchase
intent data to vendors directly.  I'm having trouble
thinking about how this would work.

Here's an offline example.  It's a summer weekend,
and I'm walking through an anchor store at the mall,
looking at khaki trousers.

Here are two pieces of intent information.

 * "I'm cutting through the store on the way to buy
   something else.  I wonder if there are any decent
   clothes on sale, since I could probably use
   some extras."

 * "I ripped my last pair of pants and I
   have a meeting on Monday morning.  I have a lot of
   stuff to get done and I'm not leaving this store
   without a new pair."

On a hypothetical intent trading platform, what's my
incentive to reveal which intent is the true one?

My intent information is worth something to me as
confidential information going into a negotiation.
The value could be low (I'm just looking) or high
(I ripped my last pair).  If a vendor is willing to
pay me some price for my intent information, then
in order for me to accept it, that price has to be
greater than the value of the intent information to me plus the
transaction costs to me of selling the information.

If I'm "just looking" and don't need the product
right away, I'm willing to sell intent information
for almost any price.  But it's of little value to the
vendor, because it just tells them that my intentions
are to only accept an incredible bargain.  I even
have an incentive to spoof my intentions.  If I can
convince a vendor that I'm not interested, I might
get a better deal.  And a fraud perpetrator has
an incentive to simulate a serious buyer.  It seems
that in any market for user intent data where the
user gets paid, wrong data will be over-represented.

## So where's the market for purchase intent data?

I can think of a few possibilities.

 * **Consultative sales:** Some sellers are willing to
   do valuable work for me if I'm serious.  Taking my
   measurements at a clothing store, or supporting an
   evaluation for a business IT product.

 * **Controlled circulation:** The basic exchange here
   is an [old magazine
   model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magazine#Controlled_circulation).
   Give a free magazine to people who do something to
   prove that they're in the market for a certain
   product.  On the Internet, you can make this
   as fine-grained as you want.  Give the user the
   ability to share some attribute in exchange for
   some content.  (For example, a local news site
   might let you read the music and theater section
   free, if you can share the fact that you recently
   bought a ticket for a show&mdash;then the site's ads
   can command a higher price because they reach known buyers.)

It's not rational for users to "leak" purchase
intent data without compensation, and therefore it's
rational to block or spoof any kind of asymmetrical
data collection.  But are there special cases where
a trade for purchase intent data can happen?

 * In consultative sales, the sales person can set
   priorities based on purchase intent&mdash;the
   more the customer appears likely to spend, the
   more time and other value he or she can get.
   There's no up-front payment for intent data, but an
   ongoing exchange of value for data.

 * In controlled circulation, the marginal cost of
   adding a subscriber is small.  The 1,001st
   subscriber costs much less than 0.1% of the total
   budget to serve.  This is different from directly
   paying for intent data, where all 1001 prospects
   (or 1001 copies of the same fraudbot) cost the
   vendor the same.

So I guess I'm still a Big Data optimist.  Remember,
when email marketing started, most of the people who
used email for marketing were spammers.  Today, most
of the marketing email in the world is still spam,
but most senders are legit, opt-in email newsletters
work, and we have a set of technologies and norms
to separate the two.  But pay-to-spam concepts never
really worked out.

Are there any other examples of how a market for intent
data can work?

## Bonus links

 * [Doc Searls on tracking and targeting](https://blogs.harvard.edu/doc/2016/04/14/consumers-to-madison-avenue-please-quit-driving-drunk-on-digital/)

 * [Jason Kint: Meet the
   Blockers](https://digitalcontentnext.org/blog/2016/04/14/meet-the-blockers/)

 * [David Carroll: Co-owning our News Future](https://medium.com/@profcarroll/co-owning-our-news-future-6ba732df6207#.fmrmatze0)

