[[!meta title="Minimal tracking warning"]]
[[!meta date="Sat May 30 06:49:08 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Third-party tracking on the web is a bad deal for
high-value sites.  For example, tracking can divert
ad money that should be supporting a local news site,
through a complex set of intermediaries, to show
impressions to local residents on a site loaded with
illegal copies of movies or music.

But an individual high-quality site can't opt out
of the tracking game unilaterally.  In order to
have a real impact on fraudulent and other low-value
sites, the protection needs to be enabled on the user
side. And it works. As more users turn on [tracking
protection](http://www.aloodo.org/protection/),
more low-value ad inventory on questionable sites
disappears from the market.

Tracking protection can cost high-value sites some
remnant sales, but it hits fraudulent and infringing
sites much harder.

The problem is how to encourage users to get protected.

An individual site can help to move users from more
trackable to less trackable, with a little JavaScript.
It will show a warning when the system detects that a
user is vulnerable to third-party tracking.  Here is
a way to make an unobtrusive warning that might sit in
a page footer, or on an <q>About this site</q> page.

	<span id="tracking-warning-inline"
	 style="display: none;">This browser is
	 vulnerable to third party tracking.
	
	<a target="_blank"
	 href="http://www.aloodo.org/protection/">Get
	 protection.</a></span>

	<script src="http://ad.aloodo.com/ad.js"></script>

The `script` element can go with other scripts on the
page, anywhere you choose to put it.  And naturally
you can change the wording and switch the link to go
to your own tracking protection page.

When you inform or nudge users into getting tracking
protection, you're depriving low-value sites of
<q>eyeballs</q> while also giving users a sustainable
alternative to an ad blocker.  While tracking
protection strategy can turn into a complex topic,
this simple start is a good way to get in front of it.
You can try it on a low-traffic page, see that it
works, then grow from there.

