[[!meta title="Filling the gaps in a new software category"]]
[[!meta date="Sat May 16 06:49:06 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Tracking protection is like bandwidth: you can
usually make more money on the Internet when
_other people_ have it.  While most of the IT
industry is chasing the surveillance marketing
bubble,
[tracking
protection](http://www.aloodo.org/protection/) is a
new software category, with opportunites to build.
For example, tracking protection is still, like early
spam filters, managed by individual users.  Corporate
IT does not yet have a good way to check and update
the tracking protection on end-user devices.  Adding a
[reverse tracking wall](/posts/reverse-tracking-wall/)
to Intranet pages is a start, but more functionality
is needed.

The other area in progress is **tracking protection
for sites and brands**.  High-reputation web
sites can do better with a tracking-protected
audience.  If your site reviews cars, third-party
firms are tracking <q>car intenders</q> to show
them car ads on cat GIF sites.  Tracking
doesn't just make users [less trusting of the web in
general](http://digitalcontentnext.org/blog/2015/03/02/connect-the-dots-between-unbridled-tracking-and-ad-blocking/),
but, worse, it artifically inflates the
number of impressions available, and [destroys
signal](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#how-signaling-breaks-down).

As the print audience shrinks, brands need the web
to grow up into an ad medium where brand advertising
works better, and fraud works less well.  So far,
the web is the best contender to fill the vanishing
brand-building niche of the magazine ad, but only
after the web can fix its data leakage problem, and
the fraud, malware, and signal loss that flow from it.

An individual site or brand can't protect
users just by giving up its own connections to
third-party trackers. Those users will still be
tracked on other sites. Users need to get tracking
protection at the browser or platform level.
Just as an email newsletter can do better when
a subscriber turns on well-run spam filter, a
high-value web site or brand can gain from each
tracking-protected audience member.

Fortunately, there is no
need to wait for [collective action or long-term
projects](/misc/rules/).
Tracking protection for sites and brands can be
simple.  Getting started can be a one-line change,
such as:

 * linking to a [tracking protection
   test](http://www.aloodo.org/test/) that recommends
   tracking protection tools 

 * [simplifying a privacy policy
   page](/posts/safer-friendlier-adchoices/)
   to remove links to confusing opt-outs that
   drive users to ad blockers.

Every user that a site or brand can help to protect
starts paying off right away, not just as one
more person not running an ad blocker, but more
importantly in the form of reduced data leakage
and fraud.  And that user's tracking protection
continues to pay off, in the form of reduced
exposure to low-reputation ads, and increased
opportunity for
[signal](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#signaling).

