[[!meta title="Open letter to the adfraud whistleblower"]]
[[!meta date="Wed Oct 12 05:59:24 PDT 2016"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Dear adfraud whistleblower,

First of all, I respect you a lot for wanting to do
the right thing.

Posting the information that you did, where you did,
is a dangerous way to do it.

As you pointed out in your posts, you are risking
your job and risking physical harm.

But you're also risking a complex legal case, where
you as an individual could be accused of all kinds of
crimes.  Your complaints against the web of companies
that you know about would be forgotten, and you would
have to carry out a costly legal defense.  Most of
the companies you mention are in good standing in the
adtech industry. You'll be coming in looking like an
employee accused of wrongdoing and making up stuff.

And, if half of what you're saying is true, you know
how quickly they can delete information or move it
to a new "clean" company.

If you're really motivated to bring these guys
down&mdash;and that's something that only you can
decide&mdash;there is a better way.

You can send documents to a trustworthy reporter who
knows Internet security issues.  Look for someone
whose writing about complex technology doesn't make
you facepalm, and who has either put up a personal PGP
key or writes for a company that's on the [SecureDrop
Directory](https://securedrop.org/directory).

You shouldn't contact me, since it's just one more
opportunity for someone to mess up.  The best
way is to do some reading and see who knows the
malware/adtech business and can receive documents
securely.

Regulatory action follows "viral" news stories, not
the other way around.  We all know that regulators
are relatively uninterested in adfraud, but you have
a story that can change people's minds.

The "tl;dr" of all this is "delete your account" but
please don't take it that way.  Again, much respect
and stay safe.

Don

**UPDATE:** [Twitter
thread](https://twitter.com/sarahjeong/status/786242605294071810)

