[[!meta title="Pass the popcorn. Hide the checkbook."]]
[[!meta date="Sat Feb 11 05:59:24 PDT 2017"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

A new digital ad medium is making its
way up the upward slope of the [Peak
Advertising](http://peakads.org/) curve. 

Aldo Agostinelli of Sky Italia
[writes](https://aldoagostinelli.com/2017/02/10/the-future-of-advertising-relies-on-the-internet-of-things/?utm_source=TwitterAN&utm_campaign=IOT&utm_medium=Paid&utm_content=ENG),

> In the age of the IoT, web-connected devices are the new smart tools that will give advertisers unprecedented access to their users’ daily lives. But there is more to it: the IoT could also help advertisers deliver timely messages and persistently reach consumers.

This is how all targeted ad media, from direct
mail to junk fax to mobile banners, get their start.
Some Marketing person comes up with the idea of using
some new technology to better target some users but
not others.

Pass the popcorn.  We've seen this show before.

Now it's time for a flood of videos from agencies
about how well the new medium works, surveys where
marketers say they're going to put budget into it,
a bunch of VC funding for firms that do it, and
before you know it, the new medium is something
that marketers don't want to be caught not doing.
The whole shitty carnival of "let's build a new
targeted ad medium" is in town.  Or in this case,
on your toaster.

For a little while anyway.

Marketers know that you have to enjoy the new
targeted ad medium while you can.  Any new targeted
ad medium always peaks, and then declines&mdash;right
about the time users figure it out.

It's not that the technology is bad.  Many new
targeted ad media _do_ provide technical advantages in
more accurately matching ads to users.  But somehow
targeted ad media always go through a boom and bust
cycle, unlike mass media advertising, where print
and broadcast ads tend to hold their value.

Peak Advertising in targeted ad media keeps happening,
because, as Agostinelli writes,

> The IoT has many benefits for advertising: not only can a message related to a product reach a specific and clearly identified target audience, but the message can be designed based on data which makes it more personal and, therefore, more efficient. 

Read that again. That's where every targeted ad medium
breaks down.  <q>Efficient</q> is why users bail.
They start voting to ban junk faxes. They start
running spam filters and ad blockers. And yes, they
will, somehow, figure out how to kick the targeted
ads off their toasters.

Meanwhile, users continue to accept magazine ads
and at least tolerate the TV commercials.  It's the
_targeted_ ad media, the ones that sound the coolest
and most efficient, that get ignored, blocked,
and regulated.

Let me share with you a sentence that's an obvious,
even stupid, platitude for regular people, but a
strange and terrible secret for digital advertisers.
Ready?

**There's no such thing as a free lunch.**

Advertising, done in a sustainable way, is
an exchange of value between the advertiser
and the audience.  The audience gives up some
attention as the ad interrupts an ad-supported
resource such as a news story or cultural
work.  In exchange, the advertiser offers [economic
signal](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#signaling),
a hard-to-fake message about the advertiser's
intentions in the market.

When a targeted ad medium helps advertisers try to get
a free lunch by cutting back on the signal&mdash;by
making it hard for users to estimate the amount
spent to place the ad&mdash;the user no longer has
an incentive to "pay" for the ad with his or her
attention.  The Peak Advertising curve is the result
of users figuring out the targeting.

User tracking and targeting projects, built
at tremendous expense, make an ad medium less
valuable, not more.  This is hard for computer nerds
to understand.  "What do you mean my program makes
things worse? But it was so hard to write!"

No ad medium entirely goes away. When the IoT
advertising hype is over, crappy toaster ads will
remain, spreading security problems and brand-unsafe
ad placements just like crappy web ads do today.
The trick for brands is to sit back and enjoy the
show, not get ripped off.

