[[!meta title="Beyond blocking vs. tracking"]]
[[!meta date="Sun Sep  6 07:38:02 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

_(A shorter version of this post
appeared [on the Digital Content Next
site](https://digitalcontentnext.org/blog/2015/08/19/wheres-the-signal/).
)_

Philosopher Thomas Wells, in an
[essay for the Australian Broadcasting Corporation](http://www.abc.net.au/religion/articles/2015/07/14/4273200.htm),
makes the case that advertising is an example of market
failure.

> The advertising industry consists of the buying and selling of your attention between third parties without your consent. That means that the cost of producing the good - access to your attention - doesn't reflect its full social cost.

...

> Since advertisers pay less to access your attention than your attention is worth to you, an excessive (inefficient) amount of advertising is produced. 

Wells makes some good points that apply to
some problematic forms of advertising.  But much
advertising, in media where it is structured right,
does have value.  And for those of us who work on
the web, the medium is new enough that we can still
make web advertising into a net positive, if we fix
a few things.

The main reason we have advertising in the
first place is help deal with
an information asymmetry problem.
Nobel Prize-winning economist George Akerlof
[wrote](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/),
<q>Dishonest dealings tend to drive honest dealings
out of the market.</q> In a market where low-quality
and high-quality sellers compete, and sellers know
their products better than buyers do, high-quality
sellers have trouble staying in business.  When the
buyer can't tell a low-quality car, a <q>lemon</q>,
from a high-quality car, no buyer can justify paying more
than a lemon's value for any car, so the high-quality 
seller can't compete.

Many institutions, norms, laws, and habits have popped
up over thousands of years to deal with Akerlof's
<q>market for lemons</q> problem.  Licensing and
regulation of sellers, product reviews, and protecting
trademark rights, are all ways to give some advantage
to high reputation sellers.

Advertising is another piece of the solution.  Tom Goodwin
compares advertising expenditure to 
impressive stone buildings for banks, and
[writes](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/i-miss-days-expensive-advertising-tom-goodwin),

> Old world advertising used to be the same, the very act of investing in TV, buying a premium billboard, taking an ad in Vogue, became brand building element because of the cost, not despite. The general public doesn't know rate cards, but there was a tacit, enduring, innate feeling that companies that advertised were companies of quality.

Perceived advertising costs do
matter to users.  In [The Waste in Advertising Is the Part That
Works](http://econpapers.repec.org/article/cupjadres/v_3a44_3ay_3a2004_3ai_3a04_3ap_3a375-389_5f04.htm),
Tim Ambler and E. Ann Hollier describe a signaling
test based on showing "expensive" and "degraded"
versions of the same TV commercials to experimental
subjects.  The audience's estimation of advertising
expense had an effect on brand preferences.

> [P]erceived expense rarely is an important direct predictor of brand choice.  However, there is a very consistent, though largely indirect link between the two because perceived expense influences perceptions of brand quality, which in turn is the most critical predictor of a participant's inclination to purchase a brand.

Ambler and Hollier split out the effects
of familiarity, information, and persuasion from
signaling.  "[H]owever much attention, recall,
and persuasion an advertisement may garner, the
effectiveness of the advertisement, and thus brand
performance, will depend on the perceived advertising
expenditure."

Wells, however, argues that signaling is a waste.  He writes,

> Like banks housed in grand marbled buildings, companies which pour vast amounts of money into advertising campaigns must be supremely confident about the quality of their products and its long-term sales. Otherwise they couldn't afford to burn so much money on ridiculous Super Bowl ads.  This argument rather reminds me of John Maynard Keynes's suggestion that in a recession caused by a collapse of aggregate demand one could solve the problem by burying bottles filled with bank notes and then leaving it to private enterprise to dig them up again.

The missing part in that argument, though, is that
signaling by advertising isn't just based on the
production values of the ad.  Ambler and Hollier
tested ads in isolation, but in the real world,
ads appear attached to content.  The signal is
proportional to the value of the content, not just the
ad itself.  Although Wells suggests that cultural
works do not require advertising, and can be paid for
by other funding mechanisms such as subscriptions and
patronage, some cultural works that would not exist
otherwise are still funded by advertising.

When those works go on to other uses, whether it's in
a book of William Gibson stories originally paid for
by _Omni_ advertisers in the 1980s, or a boxed DVD set
of _Star Trek_ DVDs paid for by TV advertisers in the
1960s, then advertising doesn't just pay its way, but
creates positive externalities.

An ad 
<q>pays for</q> the user attention it consumes by
sending an economic signal about the advertiser's
intent in the marketplace.  The more obviously
expensive the content, the stronger the signal.
Users tolerate ads in signal-carrying media such as
magazines, and a positive feedback loop can emerge.
Valuable signal-carrying ads make more money available
to fund content, whose quality and perceived cost
increases signaling power and therefore ad rates, and
so on. All of this makes a signal-carrying medium a
great business to be in once the feedback gets going.

But when advertisers try to
"efficiently" [target some users and not
others](http://radar.oreilly.com/2014/12/how-browsers-get-to-know-you-in-milliseconds.html),
though, signaling breaks down.  Targeting turns an ad
into the digital version of a cold call.  

Michael Tiffany, CEO
of advertising security firm White Ops,
[said](http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/online-ad-fraudsters-are-stealing-6-billion-brands-152823),
<q>The fundamental value proposition of these ad tech
companies who are de-anonymizing the Internet is,
<q>Why spend big CPMs on branded sites when I can get
them on no-name sites?</q></q> Behind the blizzard of
<q>data-driven insights</q> in the adtech business is
a simple promise: tracking technology lets advertisers
reach high-value users with low-cost impressions.
But low-cost impressions carry less signal.  And the
better that users understand how targeted ads find
them, the less well those ads work.  With all the
information on the seller's side, the ad as cold call
is of no value to the recipient.

Even when a web ad appears on expensive content,
it fails to carry the signal that it would convey
in a less targetable medium. Users are aware that
ads "follow them around," so instead of viewing an
ad as part of an expensive, signal-carrying ad buy,
even a well-designed ad on high-quality content could
be an example of cheap targeting.  _(Are they really
still supporting that product, or am I the one poor
loser who they're targeting with the last obsolete
machine in the warehouse?)_

Targeted ads tend to "burn out" the medium
in which they appear, through a [Peak
Advertising](http://peakads.org/) effect.  While
magazine ads continue to plug away, pulling in
CPMs that would be headline news in any digital
medium, each new targetable medium falls in value
and popularity as users figure it out, filter it,
or get their governments to restrict it.  Remember
junk faxes?

Solutions
---------

Two extremes dominate the conversation about what
do to about online ads.  The first is to deploy
general-purpose ad blockers everywhere and eliminate
ad-supported content in favor of other business
models.  This is clearly suboptimal.  The existence
of magazines that people voluntarily subscribe to is
proof that there is some level of advertising that can
work, and pay for new works of culture and journalism
that would not otherwise exist.

The other extreme is to advocate that users run
browsers and other clients in a completely unprotected
and targetable state. This doesn't work, not just
because of the ongoing data leakage, ad fraud and
[malvertising](http://blog.aloodo.org/posts/end-user-security/)
problems, which make some protection a necessity,
but because of signaling failure.  When a medium
fails to create positive feedback from signaling,
publishers struggle.

A third way is needed.   Fortunately, new [tracking
protection tools](http://www.aloodo.org/protection/)
are able to block low-value, cold-call-like
targeted ads while permitting signal-carrying ads, the
ones that respect users' choices not to be tracked.
Tracking protection gets web sites out of the peak
advertising cycle and into the signaling business.

Instead of waiting for more and more users to
give up on advertising and go get an ad blocker,
publishers can help and encourage users to run
tracking protection tools instead.  There are lots of
low-impact, easy ways to get started.  But if sites
fail to turn the web into a signal-carrying medium,
web ads could slide into a no-win struggle like email
spam/anti-spam, and anti-advertising philosophy could
turn out to be right after all.

**Next:** [How to get
started](http://blog.aloodo.org/misc/howto/)

