[[!meta title="What do you mean, we?"]]
[[!meta date="Sun Jul  3 07:38:02 PDT 2016"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Enough with the "we" stuff about fixing web
advertising.

This is not a "we" problem.  "We" can't promise
to replace "ads that provoke blocking" with
"better-performing ads", because ads that provoke
blocking _are_ the high-performing ads.  As a
web user, you're not seeing crap ads because the
advertisers want to waste money and annoy you. You're
seeing them because they test well.

Crappy, annoying, deceptive ads get clicks.

The terrible stuff on the web [is there because it
works](https://joshuaearl.com/yes-popups-suck-heres-why-i-wont-be-taking-mine-down-anytime-soon/).

Everyone agrees that "we" need to get rid of "bad"
ads.  Naturally, "we" is defined as "you" and "bad" is
"not the ads that work for me."  But because the same
qualities that get response also provoke blocking,
there's no equilibrium strategy here.

Imagine that all the right-thinking people agreed to
[L.E.A.N.](http://blog.aloodo.org/posts/lean-beef/)
or some other set of self-regulation terms.
No auto-playing videos, no NSFW animations, no fake
error dialogs.

The more that self-regulation limits
crappy/click-getting practices, the more incentive
for any advertiser who is willing to bend the rules
and offer a little more money to run an ad that's a
little bit creepier, a little more attention-getting
or finger-fumble-attracting.

Incentives for bad practices are there because users
can be tracked from site to site.  That marginally
extra-annoying advertiser will be able to find a
publisher with marginal reputation, who claims to
be able to reach the desired users and is willing
to accept the ad. And self-regulation breaks down,
or never really gets going in the first place.
**Cross-site tracking gives everyone an incentive to
do advertising that gets clicks today and provokes
ad blocking tomorrow.**

So there's no "we" solution.  The fixes for the
web advertising problem will have to happen one
user at a time.  Every user who becomes harder to
track from site to site helps give high-reputation
sites a little more [ market power to enforce ad
standards](http://blog.aloodo.org/posts/service-journalism/).


## Publishers and brands need action from users

In today's web advertising, [high-reputation and
low-reputation publishers compete to reach the same
users](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#targeting-failure-legit-sites-lose-intermediarieswin).
And [high-reputation brands are hard
to tell apart from low-reputation
ones](http://blog.aloodo.org/posts/tv-shopping-with-rory-sutherland/).

High-reputation publishers and brands win when users
get less trackable, but users have to be the ones to
take the action.

So instead of putting everything in terms of "we",
it's time to think about reciprocity and measuring
the benefit from each additional tracking-protected
user.  Instead of hippy-dippy "we" stuff, relying on
everyone to cooperate, let's talk exchange of value.
Big Data is not just a tool to help with
low-reputation strategies.  Data-driven projects can
help with high-reputation strategies, too.

Questions might include:

 * Which customers gain the most value to me when
   they're protected from tracking by low-reputation
   competitors?  (For an HMO, what's the net present
   value of protecting a customer from quack diet
   ads? For a car insurer, how much is it worth to
   keep the most profitable customers from being
   picked off based on their social media usage?)

 * Which categories of readers are most valuable to
   the best advertisers on my site? How much does
   it cost me when adtech intermediaries can follow
   them elsewhere?  What's a cost-effective tracking
   protection solution that I can offer them, to keep
   them from being reachable on low-value sites?

I'm not against "we need to work together" messages in
situations where a cooperative solution is really
workable or necessary. But for fixing web ads? Time to
give it up.
