[[!meta title="Why adtech fraud would make the worst heist movie ever"]]
[[!meta date="Sun Apr 26 05:59:24 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Adtech fraud is [costing advertisers
billions](http://adcontrarian.blogspot.com/2014/12/what-every-ceo-needs-to-know-about.html).
Computer hacking, big corporations losing big
money&mdash;should be a formula for an awesome heist
movie, right?  Not quite.  Screenwriters, you might
want to stick to cash, cars, and _objets d'art_.
Here's why.

 * __Getting the crew together?__  Forget it.  All the
   parts of adfraud can be [done
   independently and connected on the free
   market](http://digiday.com/publishers/ad-farming-adventures/).
   There go a whole bunch of great scenes for
   introducing characters.

 * __Split-second timing?__ Try split year. There are
   hundreds of ad networks out there, and they're
   vulnerable to different attacks at different
   times. If your movie's cyber-felons miss one
   opportunity, they could just connect to a
   different network later and still get paid.
   Where's the drama?

 * __Hard-boiled detectives trying to catch the gang?__
   More like over easy.  The adtech
   industry <q>[committed $1.5 million in
   funding](http://adage.com/article/digital/industry-anti-fraud-group-ceo-months/297449/)</q>
   (and set up a 24-member committee!) to fight a
   $6-10 billion problem.  Adfraud isn't taking
   candy from a baby, it's taking candy from _a dude
   whose job is giving away candy_.  More fraud means
   more money for adtech intermediaries. How hard
   are they going to chase your characters, really?

 * __Elite skills?__ The audience wants to see your
   larcenous (anti)heroes pull off a great
   feat of skill.  Adfraud, not so
   much. There's even [phone support for it
   now](http://www.themediabriefing.com/article/who-are-the-fraudsters-costing-the-ad-industry-billions).

 * __Seriously, a decent movie would have
   _somebody_ guarding the safe.__ An
   owner who cares, preferably a badass who's
   going to come down hard on your protagonists
   if he catches them.  Can't help you here.  Somebody is stealing [this
   guy](http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/setting-record-straight-viewability-fraud/295955/)'s
   money, and he's all like, <q>Come on, everybody,
   we need to work together as an industry on stealing
   less of my money.</q>

 * __Dramatic risk of getting caught?__ Not a
   chance of going to prison&mdash;the worst that
   happens is that some of your characters get their accounts banned,
   and they have to log in with their other ones.  Your movie's
   production designer is going to have to work awful hard
   to make that <q>Access denied</q> screen look cool
   enough to keep the audience awake.

 * __Will crime pay?__ A good
   heist movie gets the audience to like the
   criminal masterminds, and hope they get away with
   something. Adfraud?  A lot of the time, __It's not even illegal.__

To sum it up, the money's there, but
the drama isn't.  Brands are losing billions to a
[broken](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#how-signaling-breaks-down)
advertising system. Third-party tracking causes data
leakage, and data leakage results in massive fraud,
malvertising, revenue loss for sites, and signal
loss for brands. But the whole story is about as
movie-worthy as, I don't know, brands losing billions
of dollars worth of carpet to leaking toilets or
something.

The good news is that we're going to fix a lot
of the fraud problem, as
we can get more of our web users to turn on [tracking
protection](http://www.aloodo.org/protection/)
in their browsers.  Maybe, if we're lucky, tracking
protection will make fraud hard enough and
unusual enough to be worth making a movie about.

