[[!meta title="About"]]
[[!meta date="Sat May 16 06:49:06 PDT 2015"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

Tracking protection is like bandwidth: you can
usually make more money on the Internet when _other
people_ have it.  While most of the IT industry is
chasing the surveillance marketing bubble, [tracking
protection](http://www.aloodo.org/protection/) is a
new software category, with opportunites to build.
While most tracking protection projects are focused
on end users, sites and brands also need tracking
protection help.

High-reputation web sites can do better
with a tracking-protected audience.
If your site reviews cars, third-party
firms are tracking <q>car intenders</q> to
show them car ads on cat GIF sites.  Tracking
doesn't just make users [less trusting of the web in
general](http://digitalcontentnext.org/blog/2015/03/02/connect-the-dots-between-unbridled-tracking-and-ad-blocking/),
but, worse, it artifically inflates the
number of impressions available, [destroys
signal](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#how-signaling-breaks-down), and
lowers the value of impressions on high-quality sites.

As the print audience shrinks, brands need the web
to grow up into an ad medium where brand advertising
works better, and fraud works less well.  So far,
the web is the best contender to fill the vanishing
brand-building niche of the magazine ad, but only
after the web can fix its data leakage problem, and
the fraud, malware, and signal loss that flow from it.

An individual site or brand can't protect
users just by giving up its own connections to
third-party trackers. Those users will still be
tracked on other sites. Users need to get tracking
protection at the browser or platform level.
Just as an email newsletter can do better when
a subscriber turns on well-run spam filter, a
high-value web site or brand can gain from each
tracking-protected audience member.

Fortunately, recommending and rewarding tracking
protection for your site's audience and for your
brand's customers can be simple.  Getting started
can be a one-line change, such as:

 * linking to a [tracking protection
   test](http://www.aloodo.org/test/) that recommends
   tracking protection tools 

 * [simplifying a privacy policy
   page](/posts/safer-friendlier-adchoices/)
   to remove links to confusing opt-outs that
   drive users to ad blockers.

Other Aloodo-powered functionality can
include [bonus content for tracking-protected
users.](/posts/reverse-tracking-wall/)

Every user that a site or brand can help to protect
starts paying off right away, not just as one
more person not running an ad blocker, but more
importantly in the form of reduced data leakage
and fraud.  And that user's tracking protection
continues to pay off, in the form of reduced
exposure to low-reputation ads, and increased
opportunity for
[signal](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#signaling).

Ad blocking and ad fraud are commonly addressed
as separate issues, but both stem from the
problem of data leakage.  More on the fraud
problem: [Thank you for buying fraudulent web
ads.](/posts/thank-you-for-supporting-fraud/)

More on site-friendly alternatives to ad blocking:
[Please Turn Off Your Ad Blocker is
over.](/posts/turn-off-your-ad-blocker/)

