[[!meta title="Rules for fixing web advertising"]]
[[!meta date="Sat May 16 06:49:08 PDT 2015"]]

 1. __No collective action.__  That's what the
   adtech people are trying to
   do on fraud, and it's not working.  ["The
   Industry"](http://adcontrarian.blogspot.com/2016/02/why-online-ad-industry-cant-reform.html)
   can't change.  Individuals, browsers, and sites can.

 2. __No long-term projects.__  The "backlog"
   never gets done.  Web sites have to work at the
   speed of `git push`, not the speed of [cheese
   tweets](http://superpixel.co/45-day-cheese-tweet/).

 3. __No <q>privacy</q>.__  Privacy is an important
   philosophical concept, which reasonable people
   disagree on, and which we do not have time for.
   We can fix obvious bugs without discovering the
   meaning of a complicated word.

 4. __No assuming that users are changing.__ We
   ignore surveillance marketing people when they say
   that <q>Consumers want to connect and share with
   their beloved brands,</q> and we need to ignore 
   <q>Users are becoming concerned about PII and
   autonomy</q> just as much.  

 5. __Work within norms and laws.__ 
   Doing creepy and/or
   illegal stuff in order to start a business is over.

 6. __No complaining.__ When almost everyone in a huge
    business category is dead wrong about something,
    that's not a reason to complain, it's a chance to
    make MAD CASH.  We're not
    veal calf serfs trapped in a silo,
    we're people
    who have just discovered a huge opportunity. Are
    you in?

[Are you still reading this? Paste this one line of JavaScript to get started.](http://blog.aloodo.org/misc/howto/)

