[[!meta title="DRAFT: 8x web ads"]]
[[!meta date="Sun Feb 14 06:49:05 PDT 2016"]]
[[!meta author="Don Marti"]]
[[!meta authorurl="/people/dmarti/"]]

WORK IN PROGRESS

We already know that existing web ads do not bring
in enough money to sustain high-value journalism and
cultural works.  Even when web ads work as designed,
the same content can produce an order of magnitude
less ad revenue on the web than in print.  The problem
is bigger than just ad blocking or ad fraud.

"Saving" the current web advertising business from
ad blocking, or reducing fraud, or replicating the
existing web ad system in a way that complies with
tracking norms, are all inadequate goals.  Instead,
we have to build a new web ad system that can both:

 * Increase publisher share of web ad revenue (we can
 get at least a factor of 2 by matching the classic
 publisher/agency split. More may be possible with
 the right capital structures and automation)

 * Increase the value of web ads as a medium (by about
 a factor of 4, to about the same ad revenue per user
 minute as print.  This is possible if we can get from
 creepy to trustworthy, and make web ads able to carry
 [signal](http://zgp.org/targeted-advertising-considered-harmful/#signaling).)

Taken together, that gives publishers a factor of 8.
Not enough to get out of the "digital dimes" and back
to "print dollars," but 80 cents is 80 cents.

Many of the parts of the new system are going to be
commodity businesses: easily clonable with low costs
of switching. This presents a problem for funding
them through conventional venture capital, because of
the risks of creating a commodity business with the
capital structure of a startup. Any company stuck in
a commodity market that still has to create the gains
that venture capitalists expect will be forced into
rent-seeking to survive. Creative ownership structures
will help with sustainability.


Proving that we can do it
-------------------------

Rebuilding web advertising depends on fixing data
leakage, but we don’t have numbers on the problem,
because leakage. Nobody in the existing adtech system
has an incentive to share any information on data
leakage and how it feeds fraud and leads to lower
ad revenue. Publishers know in principle that data
leakage is a problem, but they can’t know how big
of a problem, because they don’t have the data. And
nobody who’s on the receiving end of data leakage
has an incentive to share. We will need to build a
data leakage warning system early on.


4X: increased reputation
========================

Safe analytics
--------------

Help publishers gain control of audience data shared
by users. Safe analytics can be run as a commodity
service.

 * Put a meta tag on a page with a session reporting URL.

 * The browser POSTs an encrypted blob to that URL, which publishers in good standing can collect and submit in batches for an aggregated, anonymous (but accurate) report.

 * In the case of a 3rd-party session reporting service, the publisher can download a report from the session logging service.

We do want to make it possible for a group of
sites to agree to request an aggregated report,
though. Imagine that 50 blogs on the same subject
want to sell ads together. They should be able to
request a common report that includes total unique
users. That's possibly a freemium angle for a safe
analytics service: sites get stats for free, but
DNT-respecting ad networks who want data on multiple
sites can subscribe.


User attribute sharing
----------------------

It's better to
talk about "identifiers" than "identities" in this
context.  An "identifier" is clearly just
the primary key in the `people` table of a database,
not something that can be matched across sites.

When a site applies an identifier to
a user, or associates a user’s identifier
with some attribute, it MUST happen
by mutual agreement.

Attributes can include:

 * This user is human
 * This user is interested in (topic)
 * This user is a customer of (company)
 * This user has been to (location)
 * This user is a member of (organization)
 * This user has a certain skill

**Offering and accepting  attributes**
is a good thing as long as both assigner and
assignee agree.  It should be easy as possible for
any site to offer a user an attribute
(as part of "account setup", "add info to your profile",
whatever), and as easy as
possible for users to accept.  Work toward blocking
any claiming by a user of a false 
attribute, and any unilateral assigning of an
attribute to a user by a site.

**Atrribute sharing** functionality should enable
a user to share attributes with a site when the
site asks.  This should not be complex or restricted
to a predetermined workflow. Users can choose to
share in many different ways.  The user experience
would be similar to "share your location", where the
site decides when to ask and the user can say yes,
no, never, or leave the site.  For example, a site
with “developer exclusive” articles and events
will be able to ask users to share attributes that
they have earned on programming sites.  Users MUST
be able to choose what to share and what not to,
and who they’re sharing it with.



Audience profile books
----------------------

As we get 3rd-party tracking to go away, ad agencies
are still going to want to buy programmatically. This
should be able to happen in a way that’s compatible
with tracking norms, but will require some kind of
machine-readable audience profile.

Just as users can choose from a portfolio
of identifiers and attributes  to share with
publishers, publishers choose the reader survey
data and recommendation data that goes into the
"audience profile book"—information used to sell advertising
effectively.

User “proof of humanness” and interest data SHOULD
be shared only with trusted publishers, and publishers
MUST aggregate it when report it to advertisers.
When designing identifiers and attributes for users,
we can keep audience profile books in mind. How can this user
identifier or this attribute be used safely (without
breaking signaling) as part of a set of information that helps
to get advertiser support?

Audience profile books can contain audience data, but not user PII
(because they’re built based on safe analytics) If
you say you want to put your ad in front of 100,000
pickup truck drivers, an aggregator will be able to
parse audience profile books to find them.


2X: Fix the split between publishers and intermediaries
=======================================================

Terence Kawaja [breaks out a $5 CPM paid by the advertiser, as follows](http://www.slideshare.net/tkawaja/terence-kawajas-iab-networks-and-exchanges-keynote/13?src=clipshare):

	Agency                 $0.50
	Ad network             $2.00
	Data provider          $0.25
	Ad exchange            $0.35
	Ad serving/rich media  $0.10
	Publisher              $1.80

That's 36% for the publisher.  A long way from the
historical split of 15% for the agency, and the rest
for the publisher.  Those numbers are averages.
Highly intermediated programmatic ads are much
different from directly sold ads.

The numbers are even worse than they appear, though,
because "cash out" sites, the endpoints of ad
fraud, count as publishers any time they go undetected.


Replace common use cases for retargeting
----------------------------------------

Retargeting is an incremental revenue gain
for publishers, but a long-term data leakage
risk. Browsers will be able to focus on areas where
retargeting actually gets clicks—abandoned shopping
carts, changes to ongoing transactions—and implement
them in a lower-risk way.

 * Any site with a shopping cart or other transaction info on a page can add a meta tag containing transaction status URL.
 * User can choose to receive notifications about changes (example: prices in the cart go down, item in/out of stock)
 * Browser will re-check transaction status. If status changes, browser will give the user a notification.
 * Also useful for things like "did my bug report get fixed? Did they set a time for my appointment?"

Make it easy to block spam or unwanted transaction
status change notifications. Make it easy to
unsubscribe from notifications, for users who already
bought the items in the cart elsewhere, or decided
not to buy.  (This might be implemented with a subset
of RSS)

Replacing retargeting does deprive publishers of
retargeting ad revenue. But the ad budgets formerly
spent on retargeting (which inherently has a low
publisher share of revenue) can move to other forms
of advertising.


Capital structure
-----------------

Venture capital needs moats and network effects and
all that stuff.   Not a good fit for adtech.

 * [Michael Eisenberg: A Call to Israeli Engineers! Adtech Is Not For You.](http://aleph.vc/a-call-to-israeli-engineers-adtech-is-not-for-you/)


Commoditization
---------------

Consolidation
-------------

Regulation
----------

Part of this complete breakfast
===============================

Any next-generation system needs to be developed in
combination with advancing Tracking Protection
technology, in applying Tracking Protection to more
users, and with collecting data on the buying habits of
Tracking Protection users.  No advertiser or agency
will bargain with users or publishers for fairly shared
information if they can just take it. Any marketing
spend has to be sold internally through a complex chain
of agencies, intermediaries, marketing, and top
management at an advertiser company. Every decision has
to be something that an individual marketer can sell to
the next step in the chain. Current surveillance
marketing is designed to be appealing to the current
buying process. We have to cut off non-permissioned
user data collection to get attention for data sharing.

