[[!meta title="Letter"]]
[[!meta date="Mon Dec  1 05:11:24 PDT 2015"]]

Dear (NAME),

Every day we see more and more examples of how people
are fed up with web advertising.

Annoying ads were even the focus of a recent episode
of "South Park".

Annoyance might just be the price we have to pay,
if the ads were working well.  But you know as well
as I do that they're not.  One new online trick works
for a while, then users figure it out and you have
to go on to the next one.

While you click from one vendor to another to try and
get a message through, your customers are swamped
with clutter. Not just confusing, annoying ads,
but security threats and outright fraud.

Users have an bad ads problem, you have an
effectiveness problem. Nobody's happy.  The whole web
ad industry is all about games that put advertisers
and users on opposite sides, when companies want to
put buyer and seller on the same side,

Isn't there a better way?  

**Yes. Now, online marketing can play defense against
low-value ads.**

What if there were a way to get more attention from
your customers and engaged prospects, by helping to
protect them from the bad stuff?

What if you could take your valuable, known customers
out of the pool of "eyeballs" that get tracked,
targeted, and turned off by problem ads?

**Now you can. Meet Aloodo.** It's a new open-source
web technology that can work with any online store
or web content management system.  (Aloodo can be as
simple as a single line of code that can be added to
any web page.)

You already know when a customer wants to hear from
you&mdash;they're on your mailing list, support
site, or app.  Now take the next step, and make
the nuisances that interfere with that connection
disappear.

 * Empower your users with special offers for email
   newsletter readers who get protected.

 * Reach users with independent off-site protection 
   campaigns with their own calls to action.

 * Build your brand's reputation by connecting to
   users' privacy concerns.

Aloodo doesn't interfere with your existing online
marketing efforts&mdash;if you want to run targeted
ads to get new customers, you still can.  What it
does is keep your already-engaged list protected.

The web advertising industry is full of talk about
how companies need to work together to end ad fraud,
and improve the qualities of web ads that motivate
users to block.  But you don't have to wait for
some hypothetical future of safer, more effective
web marketing.  You and your customers can get
started today.

**CALL TO ACTION HERE: demo/eval OR free level**

